docs: improve HPA user guide (#2540)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/content/en/docs/use-cases/hpa.md

weight: 20
---

## Scaling Workloads based on Keptn metrics

Kubernetes provides us with a lot of built-in capabilities to ensure
running enough replicas in order to meet the current demand of the Workloads.
One of these is the
[HorizontalPodAutoscaler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/)
(HPA).

> HPA can make use of the [Keptn Metrics](../getting-started/metrics.md) custom API

Reviewer: here we could add a link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/external-api/custom-metrics.v1beta2/ to highlight that we are integrating with the kubernetes api extenstion

in order to scale the number of replicas of the Workloads based on the current
load by using metrics such as CPU throttling, memory consumption or response time.

### Installation of Keptn Metrics Operator

To use HPA with custom metrics API, Keptn Metrics Operator needs to be installed on our cluster.
For more information about installation please refer to the official
[installation guide](../installation/_index.md).

> **Note**
Please be aware that Keptn Lifecycle Operator does not need to be installed for this use-case.

### Installation of metrics provider (optional)

If you do not have metrics provider installed on your cluster yet, please do so.

For this tutorial we are going to use [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/).
For more information about how to install Prometheus into your cluster, please
refer to the [official Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/installation/).

> ### Deploy sample application

Author: it says so in the ticket, I think it does not hurt that we have examples how to deploy this, as there are multiple places where unexperienced users can make mistakes

> ### Deploy sample application

Reviewer 2: We agreed in the ticket that we will already require users to have the KeptnMetric and provider ready when starting this guide 🤷🏼

> ### Deploy sample application

Reviewer 2: @odubajDT and I discussed this again and we agreed that in this case it makes sense to keep the sample app and metrics + provider setup on this page, since everything needs to be referenced correctly to make sense together.

> In the next step, we need to deploy our application to the cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a first step, we need to deploy our application to the cluster.
```

For this we are going to
use a single service `podtato-head` application.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-entry
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
  labels:
    app: podtato-head
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      component: podtato-head-entry
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        component: podtato-head-entry
    spec:
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 5
      containers:
      - name: server
        image: ghcr.io/podtato-head/entry:0.2.7
        imagePullPolicy: Always
        resources:
          limits:
            cpu: 5m
            memory: 128Mi
          requests:
            cpu: 1m
            memory: 64Mi
        ports:
        - containerPort: 9000
        env:
        - name: PODTATO_PORT
          value: "9000"
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-entry
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
  labels:
    app: podtato-head
spec:
  selector:
    component: podtato-head-entry
  ports:
  - name: http
    port: 9000
    protocol: TCP
    nodePort: 30900
    targetPort: 9000
  type: NodePort
```

Please create a `podtato-kubectl` namespace and apply the above manifest

> to your cluster and continue with the next steps.

Author: we assume that it's quite clear that the users know how to apply manifests. We explained it once above, I don't think it needs to be here again

After applying, please make sure that the application is up and running:

```shell
$ kubectl get pods -n podtato-kubectl
podtato-head-entry-58d6485d9b-ld9x2         1/1     Running     (2m ago)
```

> ### Create KeptnMetric and KeptnMetricsProvider custom resources

Author: In this case no, they would need to change the HPA and configure it differently. But in general yes, HPA can use k8s metrics API only

  fetchIntervalSeconds: 10
  range:
    interval: "30s"
```

For more information about the `KeptnMetric` and `KeptnMetricsProvider` custom resources,
please refer to the official [CRD documentation](../crd-ref/metrics/v1beta1/_index.md).

After a few seconds we should be able to see values for the `cpu-throttling` metrics:

```shell
$ kubectl describe  keptnmetrics.metrics.keptn.sh cpu-throttling -n podtato-kubectl
Name:         cpu-throttling
Namespace:    podtato-kubectl
API Version:  metrics.keptn.sh/v1beta1
Kind:         KeptnMetric
Spec:
  Fetch Interval Seconds:  60
  Provider:
    Name:  prometheus-provider
  Query:  avg(rate(container_cpu_cfs_throttled_seconds_total{container="server", namespace="podtato-kubectl"}))
Status:
  Raw Value: <omitted for readability>
  Value:         1.63
```

Here we can see that the value of the `cpu-throttling` metric is `1.63`

### Set up HorizontalPodAutoscaler

Now that we are able to retrieve the value of our metric, and have it stored in
our cluster in the status of our `KeptnMetric` custom resource, we can configure
a `HorizontalPodAutoscaler` to make use of this information and therefore scale
our application automatically:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: let's put the manifest samples into their own files and embed them here

> apiVersion: autoscaling/v

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: autoscaling/v2
```

weight: 20
---

## Scaling Workloads based on Keptn metrics

> Kubernetes provides many built-in capabilities to ensure
> running enough replicas in order to meet the current demand of the Workloads.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes provides many built-in capabilities to ensure
that enough replicas are running in order to meet the current demand of your [workloads](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/).
```

One of these is the
[HorizontalPodAutoscaler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/)
(HPA).

> HPA can make use of the Keptn Metrics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An HPA can make use of the Keptn Metrics
```

[custom API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/external-api/custom-metrics.v1beta2/)

> to scale the number of replicas of the Workloads based on the current

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to scale the number of replicas of [workloads](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/) based on the current
```

load.
It does this by using metrics such as CPU throttling, memory consumption, or response time.

### Installation of Keptn Metrics Operator

> To use HPA with the custom metrics API,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use an HPA with the custom metrics API, the
```

Keptn Metrics Operator must be installed on the cluster.

> For more information about installation please refer to the official

Reviewer 2: all our docs are official :D
```suggestion
For more information about installation please refer to the
```

[installation guide](../installation/_index.md).

> **Note**
The Keptn Lifecycle Operator does not need to be installed for this use-case.

### Installation of metrics provider (optional)

> If you do not yet have a metrics provider installed on your cluster yet, please do so.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you do not have a metrics provider installed on your cluster yet, please do so.
```

For this tutorial we are going to use [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/).
For more information about how to install Prometheus into your cluster, please

> refer to the [official Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/installation/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
refer to the [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/installation/).
```

### Deploy sample application

> As a first step, we need to deploy our application to the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, we need to deploy our application to the cluster.
```

For this we are going to
use a single service `podtato-head` application.

{{< embed path="/docs/assets/hpa/sample-app.yaml" >}}

Please create a `podtato-kubectl` namespace and apply the above manifest
to your cluster and continue with the next steps.
After applying, please make sure that the application is up and running:

```shell
$ kubectl get pods -n podtato-kubectl
podtato-head-entry-58d6485d9b-ld9x2         1/1     Running     (2m ago)
```

### Create KeptnMetric and KeptnMetricsProvider custom resources

To be able to react on the metrics of our application, we need to create
`KeptnMetrics` and `KeptnMetricsProvider` custom resources.

> These metrics are
> exposed via custom metrics API, what gives us the possibility to configure HPA
> to react on the values of these metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These metrics are
exposed via the custom metrics API, which gives us the possibility to configure
the HPA to react on the values of these metrics:
```

{{< embed path="/docs/assets/hpa/keptnmetric.yaml" >}}

For more information about the `KeptnMetric` and `KeptnMetricsProvider` custom resources,

> please refer to the official [CRD documentation](../crd-ref/metrics/v1beta1/_index.md).

Reviewer 2: you don't need to add the index file if you don't link to a specific anchor inside the file
```suggestion
please refer to the [CRD documentation](../crd-ref/metrics/v1beta1/).
```

> After a few seconds we should be able to see values for the `cpu-throttling` metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a few seconds we should be able to see values for the `cpu-throttling` metric:
```

```shell
$ kubectl describe  keptnmetrics.metrics.keptn.sh cpu-throttling -n podtato-kubectl
Name:         cpu-throttling
Namespace:    podtato-kubectl
API Version:  metrics.keptn.sh/v1beta1
Kind:         KeptnMetric
Spec:
  Fetch Interval Seconds:  60
  Provider:
    Name:  prometheus-provider
  Query:  avg(rate(container_cpu_cfs_throttled_seconds_total{container="server", namespace="podtato-kubectl"}))
Status:
  Raw Value: <omitted for readability>
  Value:         1.63
```

Here we can see that the value of the `cpu-throttling` metric is `1.63`

> ### Set up HorizontalPodAutoscaler

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Set up the HorizontalPodAutoscaler
```

Now that we are able to retrieve the value of our metric, and have it stored in
our cluster in the status of our `KeptnMetric` custom resource, we can configure
a `HorizontalPodAutoscaler` to make use of this information and therefore scale
our application automatically:

{{< embed path="/docs/assets/hpa/hpa.yaml" >}}

As we can see in this example, we are now referring to the `KeptnMetric`

> we applied earlier, and tell HPA to scale up our application, until our

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we applied earlier, and tell the HPA to scale up our application, until our
```

Conditions:
  Type            Status  Reason               Message
  ----            ------  ------               -------
  AbleToScale     True    ScaleDownStabilized  recent recommendations were higher than current one, applying the highest recent recommendation
  ScalingActive   True    ValidMetricFound     the HPA was able to successfully calculate a replica count from KeptnMetric metric cpu-throttling
  ScalingLimited  True    TooManyReplicas      the desired replica count is more than the maximum replica count
Events:
  Type    Reason             Age                  From                       Message
  ----    ------             ----                 ----                       -------
  Normal  SuccessfulRescale  7m18s (x5 over 16h)  horizontal-pod-autoscaler  New size: 4; reason: KeptnMetric metric cpu-throttling above target
  Normal  SuccessfulRescale  6m18s                horizontal-pod-autoscaler  New size: 7; reason: KeptnMetric metric cpu-throttling above target
  Normal  SuccessfulRescale  6m3s (x4 over 16h)   horizontal-pod-autoscaler  New size: 10; reason: KeptnMetric metric cpu-throttling above target
```

> If we retrieve the pods of our application, we can see that instead of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If we retrieve the pods of our application, we can see that, instead of
```
